Title: DRIP-R: A Benchmark for Decision-Making and Reasoning Under Real-World Policy Ambiguity in the Retail Domain

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.07699v1

Published Time: Mon, 11 May 2026 01:30:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# DRIP-R : A Benchmark for Decision-Making and Reasoning Under Real-World Policy Ambiguity in the Retail Domain 

Hsuvas Borkakoty ∗

Interdisciplinary Transformation University Austria 

hsuvas.borkakoty@it-u.at 

Sebastian Pohl ∗

Interdisciplinary Transformation University Austria 

sebastian.pohl@it-u.at 

Cheng Wang 

Amazon Berlin 

cwngam@amazon.de 

Bei Chen 

Amazon Berlin 

chenbe@amazon.de 

Yufang Hou 

Interdisciplinary Transformation University Austria 

yufang.hou@it-u.at 

## Abstract 

LLM-based agents are increasingly deployed for routine but consequential tasks in real-world domains, where their behavior is governed by inherently ambiguous domain policies that admit multiple valid interpretations. Despite the prevalence of such ambiguities in practice, existing agent benchmarks largely assume unam-biguous, well-specified policies, leaving a critical evaluation gap. We introduce 

DRIP-R , a benchmark that systematically exploits real-world retail policy ambigu-ities to construct scenarios in which no single correct resolution exists. DRIP-R 

comprises a curated set of policy-ambiguous return scenarios paired with a real-istic customer personas, a full-duplex conversational simulation with tool-calling capabilities and a multi-judge evaluation framework covering policy adherence, dialogue quality, behavioral alignment, and resolution quality. Our experiments show that frontier models fundamentally disagree on identical policy-ambiguous scenarios, confirming that ambiguity poses a genuine and systematic challenge to LLM decision-making. 2

## 1 Introduction 

LLM-based conversational agents are increasingly deployed in real-world domains such as retail, healthcare, and finance to handle high-stakes, domain-specific tasks [Luo et al., 2025]. In these settings, domain policies play a central role: they specify which actions are permissible, constrain expected behavior across task scenarios, and provide the normative basis for judging whether an agent’s output constitutes an appropriate resolution. In parallel, recent advances in LLM agent benchmarking have improved our understanding of agent capabilities across multiple dimensions [Yehudai et al., 2025]. Existing agent evaluation work primarily focuses on agents’ abilities required to resolve tasks, including planning [Zhang et al., 2024a], instruction following [Wang et al., 2026, Sun et al., 2026], and tool-calling [Lu et al., 2025, Chen et al., 2025]. However, the policies used in these benchmarks are often purpose-built for evaluation: they are cleanly specified, narrowly scoped, and tailored to the benchmark tasks. 

> ∗Equal contribution.
> 2We will release the complete benchmark with associated data and code upon acceptance. Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.07699v1 [cs.CL] 8 May 2026

Figure 1: Overview of the benchmark pipeline. Although this design makes evaluation tractable, it abstracts away a central difficulty of real-world deployment: real policies are rarely complete and unambiguous. Real-world domain policies, often contain implicit assumptions and ambiguous language that admit multiple valid interpretations [Fowler, 2023]. For example, the statement ‘Items can be returned as long as they are in unused condition’ from Amazon’s return policy 3 opens the question of what constitutes ‘unused’ for a specific item, leading to different yet defensible conclusions about an item’s return eligibility. These ambiguities are not monolithic, as they can be classified as vagueness ,

semantic ambiguity , referential ambiguity , or incompleteness [Massey et al., 2014]. The presence of ambiguities reflects a deeper real-world challenge: when legitimate values conflict (such as customer satisfaction, organizational profit, and regulatory compliance), no single correct resolution exists, a phenomenon rooted in value pluralism [Berlin, 1969]. Human organizations have developed institutional safeguards over decades to navigate these tensions, such as frontline discretion, escalation procedures, audits, and precedent, as studied in street-level bureaucracy research [Lipsky, 1980, Nothdurfter and Hermans, 2018]. LLM agents, however, may operate without comparable safeguards: when the governing policy is ambiguous, an agent may exploit discretionary space, overcommit to one interpretation, or produce a technically valid but unintended outcome while still appearing policy-compliant. This is not hypothetical: Claude Opus 4.5 recently resolved a τ 2-bench [Barres et al., 2025b] airline-booking task by identifying a policy loophole, producing a technically valid yet unintended resolution through exploiting policy ambiguity [Grace et al., 2026]. These limitations expose a gap in current agent evaluation. Benchmarks such as τ and τ 2 incorporate simplified domain policies and often rely on limited evaluation scopes, such as binary acceptability [Barres et al., 2025b]. As a result, they provide limited insight into how agents reason under realistic policy ambiguity, where multiple interpretations may be defensible and outcomes must be evaluated along several dimensions. To address this gap, we introduce DRIP-R (Decision-making and Reasoning In ambiguous Policy for Retail), a benchmark for evaluating LLM agents in dynamic conversational settings governed by realistic, ambiguous domain policies. Grounded in retail order returning scenarios, DRIP-R assesses not only whether agents reach acceptable outcomes, but also how they interpret policy ambiguity, justify decisions, and balance competing stakeholder interests. As illustrated in Figure 1, we construct DRIP-R by first systematically identifying ambiguities in Amazon’s return policy. Based on these ambiguities, we design order-return tasks and present them 

> 3https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId=GKM69DUUYKQWKWX7

2to the agent in a conversational scenario. To evaluate agent performance, we develop an evaluation framework spanning policy adherence, behavioral alignment, conversational capabilities, and resolu-tion quality. We evaluate DRIP-R across multiple LLMs and report a fine-grained analysis of agent behavior under ambiguity. Our findings show that policy ambiguities pose a systematic challenge to LLM decision-making in agentic scenarios. These ambiguities further impact conversations and reso-lutions across models: policy adherence is universally high early in the conversation, with trajectory differences emerging across models, and certain ambiguity types are particularly difficult for agents to resolve consistently with their stated reasoning. Together, our work makes three contributions. First, we introduce DRIP-R , an open-source benchmark for evaluating LLM agents in realistic, policy-ambiguous retail return scenarios. Second, we develop a multidimensional evaluation framework and simulation infrastructure to assess agent behavior across policy adherence, behavioral alignment, conversational quality, and resolution accuracy. Third, we provide an empirical analysis across LLMs, ambiguity types, and agent personas, revealing fine-grained patterns in how agents reason, interact, and make decisions under policy ambiguity. 

## 2 Preliminaries and Problem Formulation 

2.1 Domain policies and ambiguities 

Zwerdling et al. [2025] defines policies as documents that contain domain-specific rules and con-straints detailed in natural language. Following Crawford and Ostrom [1995], we adopt a broader view in which policies are constituted by rules, norms, and shared strategies that structure the situations in which actions occur. This broader view is particularly apt for retail, where policies extend beyond explicit rules to encompass norms around customer treatment, discretionary judgment, and contextual eligibility. Retail returns offer a useful setting for studying such policy complexity: resolution requires reasoning over product condition, purchase timelines, customer circumstances, category-specific exceptions, and eligibility criteria, often without a single universally correct outcome. We therefore ground 

DRIP-R in Amazon’s publicly available return policy, a comprehensive retail policy covering diverse product categories, conditions, and edge cases. We define policy ambiguity as a property of a policy statement that permits more than one valid interpretation depending on context [Fowler, 2023]. This definition aligns with broader accounts of ambiguity as the coexistence of multiple, potentially conflicting interpretations of situations or processes [Zahariadis, 2016]. Under this definition, Amazon’s return policy offers a realistic basis for constructing tasks that test how agents interpret and act under ambiguous domain rules. 

2.2 Problem setup 

In this section, we formalize the setting in which the LLM customer service agent must handle a user’s return request in accordance with a domain policy that admits multiple defensible interpretations through a conversational setup. 

Domain policy. Formally, we define our benchmark policy as a sequence of natural-language statements that express these rules, norms, and shared strategies. 

BP = ( p1, p 2, . . . , p N ). (1) Where statement pi can admit a (possibly singleton) set of ki plausible interpretations I(pi) = 

{ι1, . . . , ι ki }. We say pi is ambiguous iff |I (pi)| > 1, and we denote the subset of ambiguous statements by Bamb  

> P

⊆ BP .

Tasks and outcomes. A task τ ∈ BT is a user-centered return request with details on the purchased items and the purchase and delivery timeline. By design, each task τ depends on at least one ambiguous policy clause pi ∈ Bamb  

> P

, meaning that pi affects how τ should be resolved. Generally, tasks depend on multiple such clauses. BO is the set of all possible outcomes. In DRIP-R each outcome belongs to one of seven outcome categories: (1) Full Refund, (2) Partial Refund, (3) Refund Gift Card, (4) Deny Refund, (5) Replacement, (6) Escalate, (7) User Abort. 3Task ambiguity. Since we only include tasks, whose resolution depends on at least one pi ∈ Bamb  

> P

,each task can be paired with a finite set of plausible outcomes 

BO (τ ) = {o1, o 2, . . . , o mτ } ⊂ BO , (2) where each oj corresponds to a plausible interpretation ιj ∈ I (pi) for some pi the task depends on. A task is ambiguous iff |BO (τ )| ≥ 2. Since all tasks in DRIP-R are ambiguous by construction, no oj

is uniquely correct: BO (τ ) contains multiple resolutions that are defensible under ambiguous policy statements. 

Scenarios. A scenario is a pair σ = ( τ, π ) ∈ BT × Π, where π ∈ Π is a user persona drawn from a persona library. The persona conditions the user simulator’s behavior, communication style, and stated preferences. Tasks are constructed in a way such that for a scenario (τ, π ), BO (τ ) does not depend on π.

Simulation environment. Given a benchmark scenario σ, a simulated user and customer service agent interact to resolve it. Our simulation framework follows the Dec-POMDP (Decentralized Partially Observable Markov Decision Process formalism process) from τ 2-bench. The benchmark environment for two player simulations is defined as a tuple: 

 S, {A i}, {O i}, T , M, Uσ

, E), i ∈ { agent , user }, (3) where S denotes the state space, including dialogue histories and the underlying simulated database states; Ai denotes the action space of player i, with tool access restricted to the customer-service agent in our setting; and Oi denotes the observation space of player i, including incoming messages and tool responses. The transition function is defined as T : S × A → S × O . The message space M

contains all natural-language messages, and Uσ denotes the instruction space for scenario σ, which includes both general domain policies and task-specific constraints. Finally, E is the multidimensional evaluation function defined below, replacing the binary reward function R used in τ 2-bench. 

Conversations. The outcome of the simulation of a benchmark scenario σ is a conversation C,which is defined as a sequence of turns 

C = ( T1, T 2, ..., T n), (4) where each turn 

Ti = ( t1, t 2, ..., t m), ∀i t i ∈ A agent ∪ A user , (5) is a possibly empty sequence of tool calls followed by a single message tm from the user or agent to their counterpart. In DRIP-R only the agent is able to make tool calls. The conversation ends either, because Tn contains an end-of-conversation message from the agent or user, or because n reached the maximal turn limit of tlim , which is set to tlim = 20 for our experiments. 

Resolution function. The resolution function ρ : C → (BO ∪ {⊥} ) × R maps a completed conversation to a resolution 

ρ(C) = ( o, r ), (6) where o is the outcome the agent committed to, or ⊥ if the conversation ended due to a user abort or reaching the turn limit, and where r ∈ R is the reasoning produced by the agent model at the conclusion of the conversation. If o = ⊥, then equally r = ⊥. In DRIP-R ρ is realized by the customer service agent. When the agent resolves a return request, it generates a final outcome statement and agent reasoning based on the complete conversation. 

Evaluation. We replace the binary reward function in τ 2-bench with a multidimensional evaluation function 

E(τ, C, ρ (C)) = e ∈ Rd, (7) over d axes (policy adherence, dialogue quality, behavioral alignment, interest alignment, task-resolution alignment and their sub-dimensions) that evaluates a conversation in the context of the task and the resolution reached by the agent at the end of the conversation. E does not yield a binary success signal, but a ground for comparing agents based on the conversations and resolutions they produce across multiple evaluation dimensions, as defined in Section 3.3. 43 Benchmark Construction 

3.1 Dataset Construction 

The dataset construction process begins with identifying and extracting notable ambiguities from the policy document. Using Massey et al. [2014] and Gervasi et al. [2019] as the reference taxonomy for ambiguity identification, we prompt an LLM (GPT-4.1) to identify ambiguities in the policy. The identified ambiguities are then filtered and verified by two human experts (IAA of 84.62% and a Cohen’s κ of 0.58, indicating moderate agreement 4), who validate each ambiguity identified by the LLM against the policy. An example of the ambiguities identified, along with relevant policy clauses, is shown in Table 3, along with definition of each ambiguity type in Appendix D. The primary task we designed for this dataset is Order Return, where the customer wants to return an order placed on an E-commerce site and negotiate its resolution with a service agent. For product details, we use an open-sourced Amazon product description dataset obtained from HuggingFace 5.To create each task, we randomly sample two or three items from the Amazon product description dataset (with no combination reused across tasks) and pass them, together with the extracted am-biguities, to GPT-4o-mini. The model is prompted to generate a realistic Amazon return scenario that depends on at least one specific ambiguity whose resolution changes the outcome, that elicits multi-turn customer-agent dialogue, and specifies the order timeline, item-level conditions, delivery status, and customer circumstances. Using these criteria, we collect an initial pool of 500 tasks, which are subsequently stratified, validated and sampled down to 40 high-quality tasks based on the pipeline described in Appendix F. Each of the final tasks was manually verified based on whether it could realistically occur in this way in a real world scenario. Additionally, for 10 tasks two human annotators annotated which outcomes are plausible for this task as described in section I.1. We found substantial disagreement on this between human annotators confirming the ambiguity of our tasks. For customer persona creation, we use the elite personas from the Persona-Hub dataset [Ge et al., 2024] and augment them with personality, communication, and language traits using GPT-4o-mini, along with age, purchase history, and income range. These traits collectively determine how the customer simulator behaves throughout the conversation. Specifically, we draw on the Big Five personality framework [McCrae and John, 1992] for personality style, rapport-oriented and report-oriented communication styles [Tannen, 2007] extended with direct/indirect and linear/non-linear dimensions for communication style, and Martin Joos’s Five Clocks model [Zgusta, 1966] for language style. From an initial pool of 30 personas, 10 are retained through manual selection to ensure realism and coverage. We combine the tasks and personas to produce complete scenarios, thereby creating the dataset. Each persona is combined with each task; therefore, the number of scenarios (or instances) in the dataset totals 10 × 40 = 400 . We provide dataset statics in Section B. Additionally the customer service agents are conditioned on five personas (D IRECT , F AIR , A GREE -

> ABLE

, H ELPFUL , AND VERY HELPFUL ) that are based on the Big Five personality framework. Each persona is defined in Appendix G.2. For benchmarking, we use random stratified sampling to pair scenarios with customer service agent personas. 

3.2 Evaluation Dimensions 

Our evaluation takes as input a given task, with its task description, a simulated conversation over multiple turns, and the resolution generated by the customer service agent reflecting the completed conversation. We evaluate three levels ( turn , conversation , resolution ) along five key dimensions, each with multiple subdimensions. Figure 2 illustrates our evaluation dimensions with full details provided in Appendix E. Each dimension is evaluated on a five-point Likert scale. Here we only give brief descriptions of the five top level dimension with additional details for a few subdimensions particularly relevant to our results. The dimensions are designed to be largely independent, so that a single agent trace can score well on one dimension and poorly on another. 

> 4The two experts adjudicated disagreements by reviewing each disputed ambiguity against the policies.
> 5https://huggingface.co/datasets/philschmid/amazon-product-descriptions-vlm

5Policy adherence TURN-BY-TURN  Policy support per-turn justification   

> CONVERSATION  Policy support conversation-level
> RESOLUTION  Policy support resolution outcome Reasoning quality logical explanation depth Say–do gap outcome fidelity
> Dialogue / conv. quality TURN-BY-TURN  Contradiction score per-turn consistency Consistency drift accumulated contradictions
> CONVERSATION  Consistency intent & context logic Resolution-oriented structured progress Verbosity appropriate length Args match execution tool call fidelity Say–do gap stated vs. executed Contradiction score per-conversation consistency
> RESOLUTION  Conv + resolution map steps →outcome logic Say–do gap stated vs. executed
> Behavioral alignment CONVERSATION  Agent tone persona consistency Agent behavior persona-driven decisions Customer tone language consistency Customer behavior persona-driven actions Schwartz values conformity · benevolence · self-direction · security · universalism
> Task-resolution adherence RESOL.
> Addresses reason resolves stated issue Task constraints usage, timing, bundles
> Interest alignment CONV.
> Interest alignment customer vs. company

Figure 2: Overview of our evaluation dimensions. • Policy adherence defines the extent to which the agent’s messages at each turn and across the conversation and their final resolution are grounded in the provided policy text. It assesses whether the agent’s policy usage is justifiable, not whether it is correct. This distinction matters in the presence of ambiguities, where multiple-policy grounded resolutions can co-exist. • Dialogue quality captures the agent’s conversational competence, independent of policy or persona. The sub-matrices assess whether the conversation is coherent, focused, and faithful to its own commitments. • Behavioral alignment measures the extent to which the agent and simulated user act consistently with their assigned personas, along with the values implicitly expressed by the agent’s behavior. This is the primary lens for examining how agents resolve ambiguity across personas. We integrate six values from Schwartz value theory [Schwartz, 2012]: Conformity , Benevolence , Self-Direction ,

Security , Universalism , and Power .These ratings capture the value priorities revealed by the agent’s conduct over the course of the conversation. • Task-resolution adherence shows whether the final resolution is responsive to the specifics of the task as stated by the user, independently of whether it is policy-defensible. This dimension distinguishes resolutions that are nominally permitted by policy from those that actually fit the task at hand. • Interest alignment captures the degree to which the conversation and resolution are aligned with customer and company goals. Company interest alignment is an LLM-judged 1–5 policy-compliance score for the company’s benefit. Customer goal alignments is measured in a two step process. First, a list of specific customer goals is extracted from the task description. Second, it is assessed for each goal independently whether it was achieved in the conversation, resulting in an overall goal satisfaction ratio. 

3.3 Evaluation Pipeline 

We implement the evaluation framework using the LLM-as-a-Judge approach [Gu et al., 2024]. We use five judges in parallel, each of which focuses on a particular part of the evaluation. This reduces the load on each judge’s context window and allows us to calibrate the LLM judges independently as described below. All judges use gpt-5.4-2026-03-05 with temperature 0 to ensure deterministic outputs. Figure 8 provides an overview of the evaluation pipeline with parallel judges. The outputs of these five parallel judges are combined by an orchestrator that validates each judges output format and aggregates the results. It computes the overall score for each dimension as the arithmetic mean of the per-sub-metric mean values. The aggregation is performed by accumulating all dimensions into a single result file. 6LLM-as-Judge calibration. While the judges are defined per dimension, calibrating each judge to align with human preference is essential [Tan et al., 2024]. We design a multi-stage calibration process grounded in human annotations collected per evaluation metric. The process starts by collecting human preferences through annotation. Human annotations are collected for a representative sample of 30 instances (each being a task, conversation, and resolution) and include metrics from our Judge pipeline (as described in Section I). Each of the three expert annotators labels 15 conversations, yielding a pair of annotators assigned disjoint sets of 5 conversations each. The pairwise annotation results are shown in Table 5, with a mean exact agreement of 0.23 overall and Cohen’s Kappa ( κ) of 0.04. Note that most κ values are near zero or below, confirming that the task is genuinely ambiguous for human annotators at this granularity. For calibration, we use two calibration approaches: Distribution Preserving Few-Shot sampling (DPFS) [Jang and Silavong, 2025], and G-Eval [Liu et al., 2023]. DPFS optimizes the judge by selecting a few-shot set of examples that mirrors the specific label distribution observed in human-annotated training data, whereas G-Eval uses auto-generated Chain of Thought steps and a probability-weighted summation of output tokens to produce fine-grained metrics. Out of 30 samples, we used 5 annotated examples for calibration and few-shot prompting, selected using DPFS, and reserved the remaining 25 examples as a held-out test set for evaluating LLM-as-judge performance. Since the evaluation metrics in our proposed suite do not rely on the correctness of the values, we primarily focus on reducing the bias between human annotation and judge results (difference between average human and LLM results), and maximizing the adjacent agreement (metrics have within one point match between human and LLM) [Selvakumar et al., 2025]. We report our calibration results in Table 6 described in Appendix J, along with definitions of each metric. Our combined calibration approach achieves a mean bias of 0.33 and an adjacent agreement of 0.84, indicating that the judge agrees with human annotators within one point on 84% of the 1–5 ordinal scores. Policy Support metrics show near-zero bias ( +0 .04 at the conversation level and +0 .08 at the resolution level), suggesting the judge can rank conversations by policy adherence without systematic distortion. Resolution-type classification achieves 56% accuracy on a 7-class problem (random baseline ≈ 14% ), confirming the judge’s meaningful outcome-categorization ability without explicit enumeration supervision. 

## 4 Experiment 

4.1 Experiment Setup 

We evaluate four models selected to reflect recent LLM developments and their suitability for customer-facing agentic tasks: two open-source ( gpt-oss-120b , Qwen3-35B-A3B ) and two API-only ( gpt-5-2025-08-07 , gpt-4.1-2025-04-14 ). The user simulator uses gpt-4o-mini for consistent, cost-efficient customer turns. All scenarios are run through each model and evaluated via the LLM-as-a-Judge pipeline (Section 3.3) using gpt-5.4-2026-03-05 as the judge. Tools are provided in OpenAI tool-call format for API models and JSON format for open-source models. Agent and customer models use temperature 0.7 to encourage response diversity. Each model receives a scenario-specific description containing only the information relevant to its role; full task details, including policy ambiguities and return specifics, are withheld to reflect realistic deployment conditions. Every turn must contain a message, preceded by a sequence of tool calls from the customer service agent, whose prompt instructs it to collect all relevant facts before producing each turn or finalizing the resolution. We describe the full simulation process with an illustrative example in Appendix L (and additional examples in Supplementary Material). 

4.2 Results and Analysis 

We present results for a selected set of evaluation dimensions across all models in the Figure 3a and in detail in Table 4 in Appendix. The scores are the average Likert-scale scores for each metric per model. From Figure 3a, it is clearly observed that GPT-5 shows better performance on in-conversation metrics. The two exceptions are at the resolution level, where GPT-4.1 narrowly edges GPT-5 on Policy Support (Resolution) and on Resolution-Oriented Responses. To demonstrate the presence of policy ambiguity, we inspect cross-model resolution agreement. For each scenario, we classify outcomes as full agreement (one outcome produced by all models), partial 7(a) Overall model performance comparison across the evaluation metrics. 

> (b) Cross-model resolution agreement by ambiguity type across four models.

Figure 3: Results of overall model performance and cross-model resolution agreement. agreement (2 or 3 distinct outcomes produced), or full disagreement (each model produced a different outcome) and report the breakdown by ambiguity type in Figure 3b. Overall, only 4.2% of scenarios yield full agreement (all four models converge on the same resolution), and 13.3% yield full disagreement (every model produces a distinct outcome). The remaining 82.4% fall into partial agreement, where some (but not all) models converge. 

Impact of ambiguities on Conversations. To identify the impact of policy ambiguities on conversa-tions, we analyse conversation trajectories to determine how ambiguity manifests at the conversational level and whether the resulting decisions are internally consistent with the agent’s per-turn reasoning. We trace the mean per-turn Policy Support score, grouped by resolution (ABORT excluded). Conver-sations of varying length are normalised to a relative position axis via interpolation and then averaged within groups (Figure 4). Across all four models, escalation maintains end-of-conversation adherence at or near the top of the bucket ordering, while refund-granting outcomes drop further than escalation from their early-conversation levels. The drift is most striking in Qwen3-35B and OSS-120B, where divergence between buckets emerges around the conversation midpoint; GPT-4.1 shows a smaller, earlier dip that flattens out; and GPT-5 remains uniformly high ( ≥ 4.83 ) regardless of outcome. We do not facet by ambiguity type here and therefore make no claim about ambiguity-specific consistency. 

Figure 4: Model-wise policy adherence trajectory by resolution. X-axis = normalized conversation progress, Y-axis = mean policy-adherence scores per turn. 

Impact of user personas on alignment. We tested, whether different types of user personas systematically produce different kinds of outcomes in return scenarios. Specifically, we looked at the relationship between the personality of the user persona and the balanced alignment score (customer goal alignment - interest alignment company). Figure 5 shows the group means for each personality 82 3 4 5            

> Openness
> 4
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Customer Goal Alignment  Interest Alignment Company
> = -0.013
> p = 0.5927
> 2345
> Conscientiousness
> = -0.030
> p = 0.2134
> 234
> Extraversion
> = +0.077
> p = 0.0016
> 12345
> Agreeableness
> = -0.054
> p = 0.0259
> 2345
> Neuroticism
> = +0.109
> p < 0.0001

Figure 5: Alignment balance (Customer Goal − Company Interest Alignment) across Big Five trait levels. Dot colour: point density (darker = denser); red lines: group means per trait score. Spearman 

ρ and p-values (top) test monotonic association. 

Figure 6: Cross-model resolution signals by agent persona. Y-axis: Mean Resolution Ordinal, ranking resolution types by customer-favourability (User Abort = 0, Deny Refund = 1,Escalate = 2, Gift Card = 3, Partial Refund = 4, Replacement = 5, Full Refund = 6) trait level. We report Spearman correlations to account for ordinal personality trait data. For Openness and Conscientiousness we found no significant correlation. Though effect sizes were small overall, for Extraversion and Neuroticism we found that highly extraverted ( ρ = 0 .077 , p = 0 .0016 ) and highly neurotic ( ρ = 0 .109 , p < 0.0001 ) user personas were associated with results that favor customer goal alignment over company interest alignment. Whereas user personas that were more agreeable were associated with lower customer goal alignment scores and higher company interest alignment scores ( ρ = −0.054 , p = 0 .0259 ). This raises questions about the fairness of customer service agents, which currently appear to reward extraverted, neurotic and less agreeable customers. 

Impact of agent personas on outcomes. To examine how agent personas shape outcomes, we map outcomes to an ordinal scale (0-6, with higher values indicating more customer-favorable outcomes) and compute, for each agent, the mean outcome score across models (Figure 6). Personas reliably anchor the final outcomes: D IRECT agents consistently yield the highest denial rates, whereas VERY _H ELPFUL agents yield the lowest across all models. However, what replaces denials (full refund, escalation, or partial) is model-dependent. The association between the agent persona and the denial rate is statistically significant in the pooled analysis ( χ2(4) = 59 .03 , p < 0.001 ). This confirms that V ERY _H ELPFUL agents deny requests significantly less often than D IRECT agents in every model tested. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduce DRIP-R , a benchmark to study the decision-making ability of LLMs under the influence of domain policy ambiguity. We construct a dataset of high-quality real-world tasks and customer personas to evaluate LLM-agents in a dual-control conversational setup, paired with a multi-judge evaluation framework that spans policy adherence, dialogue quality, and resolution 9alignment. We then experiment with different models to demonstrate the impact of policy ambiguities on LLMs’ behavior, conversational trajectories, and differences in resolution. This work establishes a foundation for building accountable AI systems that operate under the inherent ambiguity of real-world policy. We hope DRIP-R provides valuable insights into the underexplored dimension of agentic behavior under realistic and ambiguous policies that shape real-world decision-making. 

## Limitations 

We acknowledge limitations of this work that we identified. First, DRIP-R currently covers only the retail domain, which may not capture the full range of scenarios that policy ambiguities introduce across other high-stakes domains such as airline, healthcare, and legal. Expanding the benchmark to additional domains is a direct avenue for future work. Second, the benchmark currently relies on a single primary policy document and one related policy documents; incorporating a broader set of real-world policies would improve the generalizability of the findings. Third, testing the benchmark on a larger set of models will draw a better picture of how LLM agents operate under policy ambiguity and will strengthen our findings. 

## Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

This work is a joint collaboration with Amazon Science, Berlin. We thank the collaborators for supporting the research and providing valuable advices. 

## References 

Yuen Yuen Ang. Ambiguity and clarity in china’s adaptive policy communication. The China Quarterly , 257:20–37, 2024. Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ -bench: Evaluating conversational agents in a dual-control environment. CoRR , abs/2506.07982, June 2025a. URL 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.07982 .Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ 2-bench: Evaluating conversational agents in a dual-control environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07982 , 2025b. Isaiah Berlin. Four Essays on Liberty . Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1969. Le-Tien Bhaskar, Gillian Mulvale, Vivien Underdown, and Mike Des Jardins. Exploring ambiguity in social prescribing: Creating a typology of models based on a scoping review of core components and conceptual elements in existing programs. Health & Social Care in the Community , 2025 (1):9390387, 2025. doi: https://doi.org/10.1155/hsc/9390387. URL https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1155/hsc/9390387 .Leo Boisvert, Mihir Bansal, Chandra Kiran Reddy Evuru, Gabriel Huang, Abhay Puri, Avinandan Bose, Maryam Fazel, Quentin Cappart, Jason Stanley, Alexandre Lacoste, et al. Doomarena: A framework for testing ai agents against evolving security threats. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14064 ,2025. Chen Chen, Xinlong Hao, Weiwen Liu, Xu Huang, Xingshan Zeng, Shuai Yu, Dexun Li, Yuefeng Huang, Xiangcheng Liu, Wang Xinzhi, et al. Acebench: A comprehensive evaluation of llm tool usage. Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP , 2025:12970–12998, 2025. Sue ES Crawford and Elinor Ostrom. A grammar of institutions. American political science review ,89(3):582–600, 1995. Luke Fowler. Strategies for dealing with policy ambiguities. Public Administration , 101(4):1394– 1407, 2023. Tao Ge, Xin Chan, Xiaoyang Wang, Dian Yu, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. Scaling synthetic data creation with 1,000,000,000 personas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.20094 , 2024. 10 Vincenzo Gervasi, Alessio Ferrari, Didar Zowghi, and Paola Spoletini. Ambiguity in requirements engineering: Towards a unifying framework. In From Software Engineering to Formal Methods and Tools, and Back: Essays Dedicated to Stefania Gnesi on the Occasion of Her 65th Birthday ,pages 191–210. Springer, 2019. Mikaela Grace, Jeremy Hadfield, Rodrigo Olivares, Jiri De Jonghe, David Hershey, Gian Segato, Mike Merrill, Alex Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Ethan Dixon, Pedram Navid, Jake Eaton, Alyssa Baum, Lina Tawfik, Karen Zhou, Alexander Bricken, Sam Kennedy, and Robert Ying. De-mystifying evals for ai agents, Jan 2026. URL https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/ demystifying-evals-for-ai-agents . Additional contributors acknowledged in the article. Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, et al. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. The Innovation , 2024. Kees Huizinga and Martin de Bree. Exploring the risk of goal displacement in regulatory enforcement agencies: A goal-ambiguity approach. Public Performance & Management Review , 44(4):868–898, 2021. Myeongjun Erik Jang and Fran Silavong. Instajudge: Aligning judgment bias of llm-as-judge with humans in industry applications. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 1158–1172, 2025. J Peter Kincaid, Robert P Fishburne Jr, Richard L Rogers, and Brad S Chissom. Derivation of new readability formulas (automated readability index, fog count and flesch reading ease formula) for navy enlisted personnel. Technical report, 1975. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , SOSP ’23, page 611–626, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400702297. doi: 10.1145/3600006.3613165. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3600006.3613165 .Ching Leong and Michael Howlett. Policy learning, policy failure, and the mitigation of policy risks: Re-thinking the lessons of policy success and failure. Administration & Society , 54(7):1379–1401, 2022. Ido Levy, Ben Wiesel, Sami Marreed, Alon Oved, Avi Yaeli, and Segev Shlomov. St-webagentbench: A benchmark for evaluating safety and trustworthiness in web agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06703 , 2024. Michael Lipsky. Street Level Bureaucracy: Dilemmas of the Individual in Public Services . Russell Sage Foundation, 1980. ISBN 9780871545244. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/10. 7758/9781610447713 .Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. G-eval: Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment. In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages 2511–2522, 2023. Jiarui Lu, Thomas Holleis, Yizhe Zhang, Bernhard Aumayer, Feng Nan, Haoping Bai, Shuang Ma, Shen Ma, Mengyu Li, Guoli Yin, et al. Toolsandbox: A stateful, conversational, interactive evaluation benchmark for llm tool use capabilities. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 1160–1183, 2025. Junyu Luo, Weizhi Zhang, Ye Yuan, Yusheng Zhao, Junwei Yang, Yiyang Gu, Bohan Wu, Binqi Chen, Ziyue Qiao, Qingqing Long, et al. Large language model agent: A survey on methodology, applications and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21460 , 2025. Amogh Mannekote, Jinseok Nam, Ziming Li, Kristy Boyer, and Bonnie Dorr. Making task-oriented dialogue datasets more natural by synthetically generating indirect user requests. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 10449–10459, 2025. 11 Aaron K. Massey, Richard L. Rutledge, Annie I. Antón, and Peter P. Swire. Identifying and classifying ambiguity for regulatory requirements. In 2014 IEEE 22nd International Requirements Engineering Conference (RE) , pages 83–92, 2014. doi: 10.1109/RE.2014.6912250. Richard E Matland. Synthesizing the implementation literature: The ambiguity-conflict model of policy implementation. Journal of public administration research and theory , 5(2):145–174, 1995. Robert R. McCrae and Oliver P. John. An introduction to the five-factor model and its applications. 

Journal of Personality , 60(2):175–215, 1992. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6494.1992. tb00970.x. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-6494. 1992.tb00970.x .Ayana Niwa and Hayate Iso. Ambignlg: Addressing task ambiguity in instruction for nlg. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 10733–10752, 2024. Urban Nothdurfter and Koen Hermans. Meeting (or not) at the street level? a literature review on street-level research in public management, social policy and social work. International journal of social welfare , 27(3):294–304, 2018. Yuanbo Qi, Aijun Hu, and Panpan Huang. Toward a framework of ambiguity: a qualitative under-standing of healthcare policy design and governance mechanism in china. Frontiers in Public Health , 13:1666193, 2025. Soham Ray, Keshav Dhandhania, Victor Barres, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ -voice: Benchmarking full-duplex voice agents on real-world domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.13686 , 2026. Liz Richardson, Catherine Durose, Paul Cairney, and John Boswell. How should policy actors respond to buzzwords? three ways to deal with policy ambiguity. Policy Sciences , pages 1–16, 2025. Shalom H Schwartz. An overview of the schwartz theory of basic values. Online readings in Psychology and Culture , 2(1), 2012. Ramaneswaran Selvakumar, Ashish Seth, Nishit Anand, Utkarsh Tyagi, Sonal Kumar, Sreyan Ghosh, and Dinesh Manocha. Multivox: A benchmark for evaluating voice assistants for multimodal interactions. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 28469–28481, 2025. Jiazheng Sun, Mingxuan Li, Yingying Zhang, Jiayang Niu, Yachen Wu, Ruihan Jin, Shuyu Lei, Pengrongrui Tan, Zongyu Zhang, Ruoyi Wang, et al. Ambibench: Benchmarking mobile gui agents beyond one-shot instructions in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11750 , 2026. Sijun Tan, Siyuan Zhuang, Kyle Montgomery, William Y Tang, Alejandro Cuadron, Chenguang Wang, Raluca Ada Popa, and Ion Stoica. Judgebench: A benchmark for evaluating llm-based judges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12784 , 2024. Deborah Tannen. Put down that paper and talk to me: Rapport-talk and report-talk. A Cultural Approach to Interpersonal Communication: Essential Readings , pages 179–194, 2007. Kristin Taylor, Stephanie Zarb, and Nathan Jeschke. Ambiguity, uncertainty and implementation. 

International Review of Public Policy , 3(3: 1), 2021. Maxim Tkachenko, Mikhail Malyuk, Andrey Holmanyuk, and Nikolai Liubimov. Label Studio: Data labeling software, 2020-2025. URL https://github.com/HumanSignal/label-studio .Open source software available from https://github.com/HumanSignal/label-studio. Ziyi Wang, Yuxuan Lu, Yimeng Zhang, Ziwei Dong, Jing Huang, Jiri Gesi, Xianfeng Tang, Chen Luo, Yisi Sang, Hanqing Lu, et al. Trajectory2task: Training robust tool-calling agents with synthesized yet verifiable data for complex user intents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.20144 , 2026. Asaf Yehudai, Lilach Eden, Alan Li, Guy Uziel, Yilun Zhao, Roy Bar-Haim, Arman Cohan, and Michal Shmueli-Scheuer. Survey on evaluation of llm-based agents. CoRR , abs/2503.16416, March 2025. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.16416 .12 Nikolaos Zahariadis. Delphic oracles: Ambiguity, institutions, and multiple streams. Policy Sciences ,49(1):3–12, 2016. Nikolaos Zahariadis. Ambiguity in public policy. In Encyclopedia of Public Policy , pages 1–3. Springer, 2023. L Zgusta. Martin joss, the five clocks (book review). Archív Orientální , 34:675–676, 1966. Yizhe Zhang, Jiarui Lu, and Navdeep Jaitly. Probing the multi-turn planning capabilities of llms via 20 question games. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1495–1516, 2024a. Zhexin Zhang, Shiyao Cui, Yida Lu, Jingzhuo Zhou, Junxiao Yang, Hongning Wang, and Minlie Huang. Agent-safetybench: Evaluating the safety of llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14470 ,2024b. Piotr Zieli´ nski, Markelle Roesti, Renata Barreto, and Mohammad Tahaei. Operationalizing respon-sible ai policies with llms: an end-to-end monitoring prototype. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI EA ’26, New York, NY, USA, 2026. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400722813. doi: 10.1145/3772363.3799675. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3772363.3799675 .Naama Zwerdling, David Boaz, Ella Rabinovich, Guy Uziel, David Amid, and Ateret Anaby Tavor. Towards enforcing company policy adherence in agentic workflows. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 595– 606, 2025. 

## A Related Work 

Policy ambiguity in real-world domains. Policy ambiguity refers to the existence of multiple valid interpretations of clauses or phrases within a policy, arising from vagueness or under-specification in the policy language [Zahariadis, 2023]. Such ambiguities manifest in case-specific scenarios, where differing interpretations of the same policy content lead to divergent outcomes, causing goal displacement in regulatory practice [Huizinga and de Bree, 2021]. These interpretive differences are task-dependent, as the impact of a given ambiguity varies with the context in which the policy is applied [Matland, 1995, Bhaskar et al., 2025]. Their impact is double-edged: ambiguities can facilitate task resolution by allowing flexibility [Ang, 2024, Qi et al., 2025] while simultaneously complicating it through misalignment of interpretations [Zahariadis, 2016]. Furthermore, ambiguities are actor-specific, as vagueness within a policy allows individual actors to impose their own interpretation [Fowler, 2023]. Taken together, policy ambiguities are an inherent feature of real-world domain policies and, irrespective of intent, they shape task-oriented decision-making in practice [Taylor et al., 2021, Leong and Howlett, 2022].                   

> Benchmark Real-World Policy Document Structure FK-Grade
> τ-bench [Barres et al., 2025a] No Single document 9.55
> τ2-bench [Barres et al., 2025b] No Single document 9.50 ST-WebAgentBench [Levy et al., 2024] Partial Per-task rule instances 7.94
> DRIP-R (ours) Yes Multi-document 11.89

Table 1: Comparison of domain policy usage across agentic benchmarks. FK-Grade reports the Flesch–Kincaid grade level of the policy document. Scores of 6–8 correspond to easy, middle-school-level text; 9–10 to fairly easy, high-school-level text; and 11–12 to moderate, college-level text. 

LLM agents under policy ambiguities. In the literature, domain policies have seen growing use as a governance mechanism for agentic task execution. The τ series [Barres et al., 2025a,b, Ray et al., 2026] benchmark conversational and voice agents with tool-calling capabilities against domain policies. Policy constraints have similarly been used as countermeasures in safety-oriented benchmarks such as Agent-SafetyBench [Zhang et al., 2024b], DoomArena [Boisvert et al., 2025], 13 Category Value N

Overview Total scenarios 400 Overview Unique tasks 40 Overview Unique personas 10 Task Complexity Very High 230 Task Complexity High 160 Task Complexity Medium 10 Persona Gender Female 280 Persona Gender Male 120 Text Length (mean chars) Task description 1,039 Text Length (mean chars) First customer message 314 Table 2: Summary statistics of the scenario dataset. and ST-WebAgentBench [Levy et al., 2024]. Closer to our focus, Richardson et al. [2025] proposes an approach combining deliberation over shared meanings and authoritative prescriptions with practical policy use, while Zieli´ nski et al. [2026] decomposes policy documents into atomic obligations and flags under-specified or unverifiable requirements to guide policy refinement. However, the policies used across these benchmarks are synthetically constructed, simplified proxies rather than real-world policy documents, i.e., typically short, single-document specifications written in clean, unambiguous language to define a fixed set of rules for the agent to follow. As a result, they do not reflect the linguistic complexity, structural depth, or interpretive ambiguity that characterize policies deployed in practice. Table 1 quantifies this gap across three dimensions: (1) whether the benchmark uses a real-world policy, (2) the document structure, and (3) the Flesch–Kincaid (FK) readability score [Kincaid et al., 1975], where higher scores indicate higher reading grade level (i.e., longer sentences and more polysyllabic vocabulary). DRIP-R is the only benchmark grounded in a real-world, multi-document policy, with an FK score (11.89) substantially higher than prior benchmarks (7.94–9.55), reflecting the policy complexity that agents must navigate. Consequently, how agents behave when presented with tasks involving multiple policy ambiguities remains largely unexplored. 

## B Dataset Statistics 

Table 2 provides a high level overview with some important statistics about the dataset. 

## C Additional Experiments 

C.1 Impact of policy ambiguity on shaping agent reasoning and resolution 

To examine how ambiguity type shapes resolution behavior, we analyze the proportion of outcomes per ambiguity type and the behavior-decision gap, defined as conversation policy adherence minus resolution policy adherence. Positive values indicate that the agent’s in-conversation reasoning is judged more policy-aligned than its final resolution. Results are shown in Figure 7. Resolution distributions are strongly heterogeneous across ambiguity types, indicating that ambiguity structure systematically steers agents toward different strategies. The behavior-decision gap is positive across all ambiguity types and roughly consistent in magnitude, with the largest gap on Coordination Ambiguity (mean 0.29), which is significantly higher than three of the four other types. This suggests that Coordination Ambiguity is particularly difficult for agents to resolve consistently with their stated reasoning. 14 Figure 7: Results of the ambiguity-type-to-resolution mapping. The left-hand side of the figure shows the ambiguity-type-to-resolution-proportion mapping, whereas the right-hand side plot shows the ambiguity-type-to-behavior-decision gap. 

## D Ambiguity Definition 

As mentioned in Section 3, we follow the works of Massey et al. [2014] and Gervasi et al. [2019]. The ambiguity types are defined as follows. • Vagueness : Occurs when a term, statement, or clause admits borderline cases or relative interpretation. • Incompleteness: Occurs when a statement or clause fails to provide enough information to have a single clear interpretation, leaving gaps in specification. • Coordination Ambiguity: Ambiguity caused by coordinating conjunctions, especially when multiple conjunctions appear in one clause; modifiers can attach to one or multiple coordinated elements; or lists allow multiple logical interpretations. • Missing Condition: Ambiguity where an “if" or implicit condition is not followed by a clearly defined “then, “else," or “otherwise" clause, or where outcomes, exceptions, deadlines, responsibilities, or consequences are omitted for specific scenarios. • Semantic Ambiguity Occurs when a sentence or clause has more than one interpretation based entirely on surrounding context, even when grammar and individual word meanings are clear.        

> Ambiguity Type Policy Clause Ambiguity Description Vagueness “Most products may be returned for a refund, replacement, or exchange within 30 days of delivery, provided they remain in original or unused condition.”
> The policy does not define what qualifies as “original or unused condition.”
> Semantic Ambiguity “You may be charged a fee if you do not drop off or complete a carrier pickup by the ‘return by date’.”
> Late-fee logic depends on the operational definition of “re-turn by date” and what constitutes “drop off” vs. “complete a carrier pickup.”
> Incompleteness “Once an item has been returned, it cannot be sent back to the customer, except for certain Luxury Stores items that may incur 100% damage fees.”
> The policy does not identify which Luxury Stores items or circumstances fall under this exception, nor does it explain the applicable process.
> Coordination Ambiguity “Returned items should be in original or unused condition, with tags attached and hygiene seals and liners intact, and in the original manufacturer’s packaging.”
> There is ambiguity regarding whether failure to comply with any sub-requirement disqualifies the return or merely reduces the refund.
> Missing Condition “Items from different orders should not be included in the same return.”
> The clause does not state the consequence of doing so, such as processing delays, rejection, risk of loss, or fees, nor does it explain how to correct the issue after it occurs.

Table 3: Examples of ambiguity types, corresponding policy clauses, and their ambiguity descriptions. Policy clauses are extracted and paraphrased from Amazon’s return policy. Table 3 shows examples of policy ambiguity types along with the clause and the ambiguity description. The ambiguity types are directly connected to corresponding policy clauses in the table. The policy clauses are refined from Amazon return policy to use as examples here, and the ambiguity descriptions 15 Figure 8: Overview of the evaluation pipeline. Each of the judges (implemented in parallel) represents the evaluation dimensions. are LLM generated and human validated. We discuss the process of collecting policy ambiguities in Section 3.1. 

## E Evaluation Metrics 

In this section, we define all evaluation metrics and their definitions. We present the metrics by dimensions, as defined in Section 3.3 and the judges shown in Figure 8. 

Policy Adherence 

• Policy Support (Conversation) [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the agent’s responses align with the provided return policy and related policies across the conversation. • Policy Support (Per-Turn ) [Scale: 1–5; Type: turn-by-turn]: This metric evaluates whether any policy claim made in this turn is justified per the provided policy text. • Policy Support (Resolution) [Scale: 1–5; Type: resolution]: This metric evaluates whether the outcome is clearly justified by the return policy based on the provided facts. • Reasoning Quality [Scale: 1–5; Type: resolution]: This metric evaluates whether the outcome explanation demonstrates appropriate reasoning given the task complexity and policy issues. 

Task-resolution Adherence 

• Outcome Addresses Customer Reason [Scale: 1–5; Type: resolution]: This metric evaluates whether the outcome directly addresses the customer’s stated reason for the return. • Consistent with Task Constraints [Scale: 1–5; Type: resolution]: This metric evaluates whether the resolution is consistent with the stated conditions such as usage, timing, and bundle details. 

Dialogue/Conversation Quality 

• Conversation Consistency [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the agent’s responses are logically consistent with the user’s stated intent, previously shared information, and overall conversation context. 16 • Resolution-Oriented Responses [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the conversation progresses in a structured manner toward resolving the user’s return request. • Conversation to Resolution Mapping [Scale: 1–5 per Res.; Type: resolution]: This metric evaluates how effectively the conversation leads to the final resolution, ensuring each step logically contributes to the stated result. • Verbosity [Scale: 1–5 per Conv; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the length and level of detail in the agent’s responses are appropriate for addressing the user’s needs. It also evaluates whether response length and detail are appropriate given the customer’s preceding message. • Per-Turn Contradiction Score (Turn-Level Consistency) [Scale: 1–5 per turn; Type: turn-by-turn conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the agent’s statement in this turn contradicts anything stated in any prior turn. • Consistency Drift [Scale: 1–5 per turn; Type: turn-by-turn conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the conversation as a whole has accumulated contradictions up to and including this turn, relative to the prior conversation state. • Arguments Match Conversation/Execution Fidelity [Scale: 1–5 per Conv; Type: conver-sation]: This metric evaluates whether the tool call arguments collectively reflect what was agreed upon in the conversation. • Resolution Description Fidelity [Say-Do Gap (Outcome+conversation)] [Scale: 1–5 per Res./Conv; Type: resolution+conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the stated resolution description accurately reflects the tool call arguments executed. It also evaluates whether each commitment made during the conversation is reflected in a corresponding backend tool call action. 

Interest Alignment 

• Interest Alignment Customer [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: Computed by LLM-extracting per-task customer goals and judging satisfaction independently for each, then taking the proportion satisfied. • Interest Alignment Company [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates the degree to which the agent’s behavior and outcome favor the company’s interest. 

Behavioral Alignment 

• Agent Tone Consistency [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the agent’s language and demeanor match the assigned agent persona throughout the conver-sation. • Agent Behavioral Alignment [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the agent’s decisions such as leniency, strictness, and escalation tendency reflect the assigned persona’s expected disposition. • Customer Tone Consistency [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the simulated customer’s language and communication style match the assigned persona traits. • Customer Behavioral Alignment [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates whether the customer’s actions such as persistence, acceptance, and escalation reflect the assigned persona description. • Interest Alignment Customer [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates the degree to which the agent’s behavior and outcome favor the customer’s interest. • Interest Alignment Company [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates the degree to which the agent’s behavior and outcome favor the company’s interest. • Conformity [Value Rating (Schwartz)] [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates restraint of actions, inclinations, and impulses likely to upset or harm others and violate social expectations or norms. 17 • Benevolence [Value Rating (Schwartz)] [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates preserving and enhancing the welfare of those with whom one is in frequent personal contact, the ‘in-group’. Benevolence values emphasize voluntary concern for others’ welfare, including being helpful, honest, forgiving, responsible, loyal, true friendship, and mature love, as well as sense of belonging, meaning in life, and a spiritual life. • Self-Direction [Value Rating (Schwartz)] [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates the degree to which the agent exercises independent judgment in ambiguous or complex situations rather than mechanically applying rules. • Security [Value Rating (Schwartz)] [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric eval-uates the degree to which the agent prioritizes safety, stability, and risk avoidance for the company. It also evaluates safety, harmony, and stability of society, of relationships, and of self. • Universalism [Value Rating (Schwartz)] [Scale: 1–5; Type: conversation]: This metric evaluates understanding, appreciation, tolerance, and protection for the welfare of all people and for nature.                                            

> Metric and definition GPT-4.1 GPT-5 Qwen-3.6 GPT-OSS
> Policy Adherence
> Policy Support (Conversation) : Agent responses align with return policy 3.98 4.02 3.10 3.73
> Policy Support (Resolution) : Outcome justified by policy 3.81 3.78 2.70 3.43
> Policy Support (Per-Turn) : Per-turn justification of policy claims 4.65 4.83 3.55 4.68
> Dialogue Quality
> Verbosity : Appropriate response length and detail 3.85 3.90 3.22 3.67
> Consistency Drift (Agent) : Accumulated contradictions across conversation state 4.95 4.98 4.68 4.81
> Resolution-Oriented Responses : Progresses toward resolv-ing return request
> 3.99 3.96 3.39 3.80
> Behavioral Alignment
> Agent Behavioral Alignment : Decisions reflect assigned agent persona 3.86 4.12 3.50 3.83
> Customer Behavioral Alignment : Actions reflect customer persona description 4.52 4.85 4.48 4.75
> Top Schwartz Value : Highest rated Schwartz value Universalism Conformity Universalism Universalism
> Interest Alignment
> Company Interest Alignment : Outcome favors company interest 3.19 3.51 2.56 3.34
> Customer Goal Alignment : Fraction of customer goals addressed 3.32 3.41 3.14 2.79
> Task-Resolution Adherence
> Outcome Addresses Customer Reason : Directly addresses stated return reason 4.23 4.32 3.14 3.62

Table 4: Evaluation of model performance across policy adherence, dialogue quality, behavioral alignment, and task-resolution adherence metrics. 

Evaluation of Model performance across different dimensions Table 4 presents the results of the metrics defined in our benchmark for the models that we test. A part of the table is represented in Figure 3a, where we can draw direct comparisons among metrices of policy adherence, dialogue quality, behavioral alignment, and task-resolution adherence dimensions. 18 F Task diversity and Stratification 

To ensure task diversity and complexity, we use a hybrid pipeline that combines LLM-as-Judge and human selection to stratify and select tasks according to the following criteria. • Ambiguities: The number of ambiguities contained in the task, requiring more than one. • Complexity: Complexity is measured using direct ambiguity patterns [Niwa and Iso, 2024] (Context, Keywords, Planning, and Theme), and indirect patterns [Mannekote et al., 2025] (Justification-embedded requests, Elaboration-obscured intent, and Implicit slot values). • Diversity: Task diversity is defined across four dimensions: scenario diversity (how unique the situational setup is), policy coverage breadth (how many distinct policy clauses are invoked), product domain variety (how diverse the product types involved are), and condition ambiguity depth (how interpretively complex the item conditions are). We collect an initial pool of 500 tasks using the task collection mechanism described in Section 3.1. These tasks are processed through the pipeline below and, after stratification, filtered by an expert to 60 tasks. Since this step is an analysis step, it is not included in the main dataset construction pipeline. The stratification pipeline proceeds as follows. 1. Data Preparation: We load and prepare the policy ambiguities and tasks, compute sentence embeddings for the tasks, parse the policy issues column, and build an ambiguity lookup dictionary. 2. Ambiguity Type Classification: We implement a two-stage classification process. The first stage performs exact matching, checking whether the issue string exactly matches or is a substring of any key in the lookup dictionary. The second stage applies a three-step re-ranker: (1) cosine similarity between the issue string and dictionary keys to select the top 20 candidates, (2) cross-encoder reranking to score each (issue, candidate) pair and select the highest-scoring match, and (3) an unmatched tier for instances that do not satisfy either stage. This yields the primary type of ambiguity for each task. In practice, all 500 tasks were classified via the cross-encoder stage, with an exact match rate of 0% and an unmatched rate of 0%, confirming full coverage. 3. LLM-Judged Complexity and Diversity: We instantiate an LLM-as-a-Judge using the complexity and diversity definitions above, with a 1–5 scoring scale. Three few-shot anchor examples (low, medium, and high) are provided to condition the judge. 4. Stratification: The four diversity sub-dimension Scores are aggregated into a diversity composite by taking their mean, which is then mapped to a three-tier system: Low (1.00–2.33), Medium (2.34–3.66), and High (3.67–5.00). The stratum label is defined as primary_ambiguity_type_diversity_tier , yielding 9 strata, of which 8 are well-populated (n ≥ 5); only S EMANTIC AMBIGUITY _H IGH is flagged as thin ( n = 2 ). The Spearman ρ

between complexity and diversity composite is 0.743, indicating moderate but acceptable construct separation. Following stratification, an expert selects tasks from each stratum, yielding 60 tasks in total. To confirm diversity, we run a 3-run resolution-collection setup under identical settings and model, prompting the model to provide a resolution as a customer service agent would. We find that 35 of the 60 tasks produce at least one differing output across runs. Based on this, we retain 5 outcome-invariant tasks (in addition to the 35) to complete the final selection of 40 benchmark tasks, while preserving diversity and complexity across products and ambiguity types. 

## G Persona Description 

In this section, we describe the characteristics we adopt for the user and agent personas. 

G.1 User persona 

As mentioned in Section 3.1, the user persona is augmented from the Persona-Hub dataset [Ge et al., 2024], and contains the following information. 19 • Name: Name of the persona. • Age-range: Age range of the persona, ideally placed within a range of 18-65, with 5-year intervals. • Location: Country where the persona resides. • Gender: Gender of the persona, should be consistent with the name provided, and can be Male, Female, Non-binary, etc. • Job Sector: The industry or field in which the persona works, e.g., Technology, Healthcare, Education, Finance, etc. • Income range: The estimated annual income range of the persona, e.g., 30,000-50,000, 50,000-70,000, etc., with currency appropriate to the location. • Person description: A brief description of the persona, including their interests, lifestyle, and any other relevant details that make them unique. • Language Style: Choose one of the following: 

– Frozen: Very formal and structured language, often used in official documents. 

– Formal: Professional and polite language, suitable for business communications. 

– Consultative: Balanced and neutral language, appropriate for general conversations. 

– Casual: Informal and friendly language, often used in everyday interactions. 

– Intimate: Very casual and personal language, used among close friends and family. • Personality Style: Likert scale for Big Five Personality Traits: Openness, Conscientious-ness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. 

– Openness (1-5): The degree to which the persona is open to new experiences and ideas. 

– Conscientiousness (1-5): The level of organization, dependability, and discipline the persona exhibits. 

– Extraversion (1-5): The extent to which the persona is outgoing, sociable, and ener-getic. 

– Agreeableness (1-5): The degree of kindness, empathy, and cooperation the persona shows towards others. 

– Neuroticism (1-5): The level of emotional stability and tendency towards anxiety or moodiness the persona has. • Communication style: Choose one of the following: 

– Direct: Clearly and explicitly stating one’s feelings, needs and wants; the speaker says what they mean. 

– Indirect: Using verbal messages that imply but does not clearly say speakers’ true intentions in terms of their wants, needs, and goals in the discourse situation. 

– Linear: Structured communication focusing on one topic at a time, with clear objec-tives, and limited interaction. 

– Non-Linear: Dynamic communication that can involve multiple focuses and is inter-active. 

– Being centered: Focuses more on people, the quality of the social interactions, emo-tional connection, and interpersonal relationship. 

– Doing centered: Focuses more on the work, results, efficiency, and achieving goals. 

– Literate: Relies on written and relatively formal language through emails, letters, charts and reports. 

– Oral: Involves spoken language through conversations, meetings, presentations, and phone calls. • Persona_id: A unique identifier for the persona. It must follow this ex-act format: Firstname_JobSector_CountryCode_NN , e.g., John_Legal_USA_01 ,

Emily_Healthcare_CAN_02 . It should be short, with a maximum of 30 characters to-tal. Use standard 2–3 letter country codes, e.g., USA, UK, CAN, CHN, etc. • Purchase_history: A brief overview of the persona’s typical purchasing behavior, including preferred product categories, shopping frequency, and spending habits. It should contain the number of orders and returns in the last year. 20 Below is an example of User persona. Note that the persona information is summarized in the example below to get a better overview. 

> {"Name": "Latasha Edwards", "Age-range": "35-40", "Location": "United States", "Gender": "Female", "Job Sector": "Public Policy and Social Research", "Income range": "85,000-110,000 USD", "Person description": "Policy analyst focused on poverty reduction, child advocacy, racial and ethnic disparities, and systemic inequality.", "Language Style": "Consultative", "Personality Style": { "Openness": 5, "Conscientiousness": 4, "Extraversion": 3, "Agreeableness": 5, "Neuroticism": 3 }, "Communication style": "Being centered", "Persona_id": "Latasha_PublicPolicy_USA_01", "Purchase_history": { "Orders_last_year": 25, "Returns_last_year": "Not specified", "Overview": "Typical purchasing categories, shopping frequency, and spending habits are not specified." }}

G.2 Agent persona 

We create the agent persona with prioritization to the personality,communication, decision approach and behavioral description. Using Big-5 personality style [McCrae and John, 1992], we introduce 5 agent personas ranging from Direct to Very helpful, as described below. • DIRECT: An agent persona characterized by low openness, high conscientiousness, low extraversion, low agreeableness, and low neuroticism. This agent communicates in a straightforward, concise, and to-the-point manner. Decisions are made strictly according to policy, without unnecessary elaboration. The agent states facts clearly, avoids sugarcoating outcomes, and focuses on efficient resolution. • FAIR: An agent persona characterized by moderate openness, high conscientiousness, mod-erate extraversion, moderate agreeableness, and low neuroticism. This agent communicates in a balanced, objective, and procedural manner. Decisions are made by treating all cases equally and following established procedures consistently. The agent explains reasoning transparently, applies policy uniformly, and acknowledges both sides. • AGREEABLE: An agent persona characterized by moderate openness, moderate consci-entiousness, moderate extraversion, high agreeableness, and low neuroticism. This agent communicates warmly and empathetically while seeking common ground. Decisions aim for win–win solutions within policy boundaries. The agent validates customer feelings, offers alternatives, and emphasizes positive outcomes. • HELPFUL: An agent persona characterized by high openness, high conscientiousness, moderate extraversion, high agreeableness, and low neuroticism. This agent communicates proactively, thoroughly, and with a solution-oriented style. Decisions involve going the extra mile within policy and anticipating customer needs. The agent offers additional assistance, explains all options fully, and follows up on details. • VERY_HELPFUL: An agent persona characterized by high openness, low-to-moderate conscientiousness, high extraversion, very high agreeableness, and low neuroticism. This agent communicates enthusiastically, accommodatively, and with a customer-first orientation. Decisions prioritize customer satisfaction and may involve bending small rules or making exceptions. The agent seeks workarounds, advocates for the customer, and may favorably approve edge cases. 21 H Conversation and Resolution Structure 

As mentioned in Section 3, we follow the conversation and resolution structure in full-duplex conversations with tool interactions, in which both the user and the customer service agent can interact with tools. We provide examples of the conversation in the Supplementary material. 

Conversation Structure The conversation array is a sequence of turns with a turn discriminator. The turn types are: dialogue turns (conversation statements from the Customer and the agent), Tool call turns (one or more tool invocations), and tool result turns (the environment’s response to the preceding tool call). The pattern for a tool interaction is always tool call –> tool result –> dialogue turn. The JSON format of the turns are shown below. 

> {"Customer_or_Agent_turn": { "turn": "customer", "message": "Hello, I would like to return some items from my recent order...", "tool_calls": null, "tool_result": null }, "Tool_call_turn": { "turn": "tool_call", "message": null, "tool_calls": [ {"tool_name": "get_order_details", "tool_call_id": "call_002", "arguments": { "order_id": "ORD-123456", "customer_id": "cust_alastair_macgregor", "include_tracking": false, "detail_type": "full" }}], "tool_result": null }, "Tool_result_turn": { "turn": "tool_result", "message": null, "tool_calls": null, "tool_result": { "tool_call_id": "call_002", "tool_name": "get_order_details", "result": { "order_id": "ORD-123456", "items": ["..."], "return_window": "30 days from delivery" }}}}

Resolution Structure The resolution is a JSON object with two fields: Resolution type and Resolution description. Resolution type shows the resolution obtained by the agent (one of the seven values: Full refund, Partial refund, Deny refund, etc., mentioned in Section 2.2). The resolution description is a free-text narrative written by the agent to justify the resolution. It contains the reasoning, identified policy conflicts, trade-offs and conditions, and facts gathered and used by the agent. An example of the resolution structure is shown below. 22 {"resolution_1": { "resolution_type": "RETURN_REFUND_FULL_BANK", "resolution_description": "Return approved only for the eligible SilkGlam Cleanse Makeup Remover Cloths. The mirror and foundation are excluded because they do not meet the original-condition policy. Refund will be issued to the original payment method after the returned item is received.", "customer_next_steps": "Print the prepaid label, attach it to the package, and drop it off within 30 days.", "agent_reasoning": "The customer requested to return three items, but only one item met the return-policy criteria." }}

## I Human Annotation 

We collect human annotation at two stages of the project: at task creation (to confirm task realism and the possible set of outcomes). We use Label Studio [Tkachenko et al., 2020-2025] to perform annotation. Each annotation and its process are described below. 

I.1 Task-Outcome Annotation 

To verify the quality of the tasks and their respective outcomes, we collect annotations for 10 (out of 40) representative tasks from three expert annotators. The annotations address two questions: (1) whether the task is realistic (i.e., plausible in the real world), and (2) what possible outcomes the task may have. The annotation followed the task generation, and stratification (Appendix F) is performed to confirm the quality of the tasks. To annotate the tasks, we select them based on the diversity of ambiguities they embed and the diversity of products and customer reasons. Prior to annotation, annotators are provided with guidelines containing instructions for answering the annotation questions, along with the policy document they are expected to reference (Annotation guidelines given in Supplementary material document). During annotation, they are provided with task descriptions that include the product name, the customer’s return reason, and the product condition. Additionally, each task specifies the situational context in which the return is initiated. An example task is shown below. 

Example Task Description 

Customer repeatedly purchases electronics and accessories and has recently returned several items, trigger-ing a warning from Amazon about “abuse of the return service.” The latest order included: (1) “SoundWaves Noise-Canceling Headphones,” (2) “ChargePro 30W USB-C Wall Adapter,” (3) “ProShield Anti-Glare Laptop Cover” (all delivered 11 days ago). The headphones were opened and tested for about 2 hours, the wall adapter was used once, and the laptop cover remains unopened. Customer claims all items are in resalable condition with all packaging preserved, and states their only intent was to evaluate compatibility (no physical damage or wear). Customer is now requesting a return on all three items, having noticed a notice on their account about potential restrictions due to return frequency. The customer expresses concern and confusion over what “reasonable use” or “abuse” means, whether their current return is in jeopardy, and what threshold would trigger a return denial. They also ask if fees could be assessed due to “obvious signs of use,” raising questions about condition eligibility. The customer needs clarity on return rights and future account status since their need to test items before committing is ongoing and genuine. 

Do not assume facts not present in the task. Use conditional reasoning when information is missing. 

The annotators reads the task and answers the following questions. 1. Is this task realistic? 2. Select all outcomes that a customer service agent might plausibly apply. Labels are check-boxes (multi-select). Then explain why the selected outcomes are plausible based on the task and policy. The mean exact annotation agreement for the tasks is 0.10, whereas the partial agreement, calculated using Jaccard similarity, is 0.46. We also observe that Escalate and Full Refund have the highest 23 positive agreement (annotators often agree when they select them), which is expected, as these are the most “default" outcomes. 

I.2 Conversation Annotation 

We use conversation annotation to calibrate the LLM-as-a-judge model (c.f. Section 3.3). To run this annotation, we select 10 tasks and collect the conversations between user and the agent LLMs. Then, the annotation task is formulated as follows: input: task, policy issues, conversation generated between the user agent and the customer service agent, containing dialogues and tool calls, and the resolution generated by the agent. Similar to task annotation, we provide a detailed annotation guideline with the policy documents, and we expect annotators to be well-versed in it (the guidelines are provided in the Supplementary Materials document). The annotators read the task, conversation, and resolution, and, based on these, answer the questions for the evaluation metrics below. • CC1 · Conversation Consistency : Are the agent’s responses logically consistent with the customer’s stated intent, previously shared information, and overall conversation context? • CC2 · Conversation Progression & Resolution Mapping : Does the conversation progress in a structured manner toward resolution, with each agent turn logically contributing to the final outcome? Consider both whether the conversation moves forward purposefully and whether the resolution is a direct, traceable result of what was discussed. • CC3 · Policy Adherence (Conversation) : Does the agent’s conduct across the full conver-sation align with the provided return policy and related policies? Consider whether the agent correctly applies the policy, omits relevant policy, or introduces unsupported / hallucinated policy clauses. Accuracy of what was said — not the final resolution; see OE3 for that. • CC4 · Verbosity : Is the length and level of detail in the agent’s responses appropriate for addressing the customer’s needs? Repeated reassurance phrases with no new content, such as “I understand your concern and I am here to help,” across turns should score lower. • CC5 · Resolution Description Fidelity (Say-Do Gap) : Does the resolution description accurately describe what was communicated to the customer, and does the conversation confirm the commitments reflected in the resolution? • CC6 · Interest Alignment: Customer : To what degree does the agent’s behavior and the outcome favor the customer’s interest? Not a judgment of correctness. A score of 5 here does not imply a score of 1 on CC10. • CC7 · Interest Alignment: Company (Amazon) : To what degree does the agent’s behavior and the outcome protect the company’s interest? Score independently of CC9. • OE1 · Resolution Type : Select the single best label for the final action the agent took. Add a note below only if the refund method is unclear. • OE2a · Request Completeness : Does the outcome address all aspects of the customer’s stated return reason and request? Consider whether any part of what the customer asked for or described was overlooked, ignored, or left unresolved. • OE2b · Agent Effort / Going the Extra Mile : Does the conversation and resolution reflect any effort by the agent to accommodate the customer beyond the minimum required by policy? Consider whether the agent proactively explored options, offered alternatives, or otherwise acted in the customer’s interest without being prompted. • OE3 · Policy Adherence (Resolution) : Is the final outcome clearly justified by the return policy given the task facts? Check: return window, item category, item condition, bundle rules, and non-returnable item list. • OE4 · Ambiguity Flagged : Did the agent use discretion because the policy was unclear? Check whether the specific ambiguity is explicitly named in the Policy Issues list. Select “Not applicable” if the policy gave a clear answer. • OE5 · Reasoning Quality : Does the outcome explanation demonstrate appropriate reasoning given the task complexity and policy issues? A more complex or ambiguous case should include more complete reasoning to score at the top of the scale. 24 Annotator pair Tasks Mean exact IAA Macro κw Macro αK                

> Ann1 vs Ann2 50.327 −0.047 −0.165
> Ann1 vs Ann3 50.273 +0 .022 −0.157
> Ann2 vs Ann3 50.091 +0 .040 −0.064
> Overall 15 0.230 +0.040 −0.086

Table 5: Inter-annotator agreement across annotator pairs. As described earlier, we run these annotations with 3 expert annotators, each of whom assigned 15 tasks, yielding 15 tasks with 2 annotations. The annotation agreement between the annotator pairs is shown in Table 5. 

## J LLM-as-Judge Calibration Results 

In this section, we discuss the error metrics and agreements by evaluation dimension that we use for LLM-as-Judge calibration. The calibration matrices that we use are defined below. • Agreement (exact agreement): Fraction of scenarios where the judge picked the exact same integer as the human. The strictest match — no partial credit. • Within-1 (adjacent agreement): Fraction where the judge is at most one ordinal step off (e.g., human=4, LLM=3 or 5). Allows for the unavoidable rubric ambiguity between adjacent levels of a 5-point scale. • MAE (mean absolute error): Average magnitude of disagreement, in score points. Direction-agnostic. Penalizes a 2-point miss twice as much as a 1-point miss. • Bias: Signed mean difference. Tells you the direction of error: positive = LLM is systemati-cally lenient (scores higher than humans); negative = LLM is strict (scores lower). Table 6 contain the results of the agreement and error metrics. The mean exact annotation agreement post calibration is 0.45, which although is moderate, can be considered acceptable due to subjectivity of the metrics.                                                    

> Dimension Metric Agreement Within-1 MAE Bias
> Policy Adherence Policy Support (Conversation) 0.36 0.88 0.76 +0 .04
> Policy Support (Resolution) 0.44 0.80 0.80 +0 .08
> Reasoning Quality 0.42 0.83 0.63 −0.29
> Dialogue Quality Verbosity 0.68 0.84 0.52 +0 .44
> Resolution-Oriented Responses 0.44 0.96 0.60 +0 .12
> Resolution Description Fidelity 0.52 0.72 0.88 +0 .88
> Conversation Consistency 0.32 0.76 0.92 +0 .84
> Task Resolution Addresses Customer Reason 0.71 0.92 0.38 +0 .38
> Interest Alignment Customer Interest Alignment 0.28 0.80 0.92 +0 .12
> Company Interest Alignment 0.36 0.84 0.80 +0 .16
> Mean 0.45 0.84 0.72 +0.33

Table 6: Agreement and error metrics by evaluation dimension and metric. 

## K Experiment Setting 

In this section, we describe the experimental setting of our agentic setup. We maintain the same setup across the models. Table 7. 25 Parameter Value                  

> Customer model gpt-4o-mini
> Agent temperature 0.7 Customer temperature 0.8 Max turns 20 Tool calling mode Native for gpt-4.1 and gpt-5 ; JSON-prompt for
> Qwen3.6-35B-A3B and gpt-oss-120b
> Max output tokens/turn 4,096 CPU API models: not applicable; Qwen3.6-35B-A3B : 8;
> gpt-oss-120b : 16 GPU count API models: not applicable; Qwen3.6-35B-A3B : 1 ×;
> gpt-oss-120b : 4 ×
> GPU type API models: not applicable; local models: H100 Run time limit API models: not applicable; local models: 96 h

Table 7: Model execution parameters. Shared values are listed once; model-specific values are specified where they differ. We use the LiteLLM 6 package to structure and collect the conversation for the API models, and we use vLLM [Kwon et al., 2023] for the inference backend for the local models. 

## L Customer Agent Simulation Setup Description 

We will now describe the setup of the simulation that we adapt in designing the conversation simulation between the customer and the agent. We follow the standard dual-control conversation framework from Barres et al. [2025b], with certain modifications. The process is described below. • Step 0: Task Split: At scenario generation, each task is split into two asymmetric briefs: 1) Agent task detail: A CRM style framing of the task., 2) Customer task detail: Containing information that customer will share, behavioral information, facts that customer holds back until asked, and the customer first message. • Step 1: Load scenario and build components (orchestrator): er variant, instantiate Agent, Customer, and Environment from the same scenario. • Step 2: Seed the conversation: The pre-generated customer message is appended to first customer turn. • Step 3: Agent Turn : Each agent turn the LLM sees: agent persona (DIRECT/FAIR/AGREE-ABLE/HELPFUL/VERY HELPFUL), primary and related policies, details, full conversation history (customer’s tool results hidden). The agent can: 1) Emit a customer-facing message (clarifying questions), 2) Call read tools, 3) Call write tools. • Step 4: Customer Turn: Now it is the simulated customer’s turn to respond. The customer model is given a complete picture of the situation, the entire conversation and the agent’s most recent message. • Step 5: Loop until terminal: Steps 4 and 5 (the agent’s turn followed by the customer’s turn)keep repeating, building the conversation back and forth. The loop only stops when one of four things happens: the agent reaches a final resolution and successfully closes the case, the customer decides to walk away from the conversation, or the conversation hits the maximum allowed number of turns (ten by default). Whichever condition trips first, the variant is considered done. • Step 6: Flatten and Save: Once the conversation reaches its end, it is flattened into a single output record and saved to a JSONL file with one line per scenario, in exactly the format the downstream evaluation pipeline expects to consume. 

> 6https://github.com/BerriAI/litellm

26 Figure 9: Overview of the evaluation pipeline. Each of the judges (implemented in parallel) represents the evaluation dimensions. The entire pipeline is illustrated in Figure 9, along with an example to show how it works. The figure is quite high-level and omits technical details for better understanding. 27